Tesla CEO Elon Musk Is Wrong About Short Sellers
By 
Bill Alpert
Updated October 15, 2018 / Original October 12, 2018

Elon Musk used to think short sellers were tolerable. He has changed his mind.
Back in 2012, when Tesla stock (ticker: TSLA) traded for a mere 27 bucks, the electric car maker’s chief was indulgent. “Even though they cause me grief,” he tweeted, “I would defend the right of shorts to exist. They are often unreasonably maligned.”
After six years of reflection, he returned to the subject. “The last several years have taught me that they are indeed reasonably maligned,” Musk wrote in an Oct. 4 tweet. “What they do should be illegal.”
Musk has obsessed about shorts as Tesla shares bounced down from last year’s peak of $384 to a Friday close of $259. You should expect an entrepreneur to hate short sellers. They want his stock to drop. A short seller borrows shares from stockholders, immediately sells them, then hopes to return the borrowed stock with shares she’ll buy later at a lower price. You can use options to bet on a stock’s decline, too. As long as there have been securities markets, folks have figured out ways to bet on a fall.
The bet against Tesla is sizable—consistently more than 30 million shares short, or about 20% of the outstanding stock. Earlier this year, Tesla’s short interest approached 40 million shares. Still, you can’t blame the shorts for the slide in the stock. There are always way more longs than shorts, and in the trading volume for Tesla—or any stock—shorts make up a fraction. Musk’s stock is down because investors worry as Tesla burns through heaps of cash and struggles to deliver adequate volumes of its lower-priced Model 3.
Musk may have his headaches, but Tesla’s stock price shouldn’t be one of them. The stock has returned 39% annually since its initial public offering. Even after a 17% drop this year, the shares enjoy a market capitalization of $44 billion. That’s nearly as much as General Motors (GM) and much more than Ford Motor (F). While those larger companies trade for single-digit multiples of their earnings, Tesla has had no earnings. Tesla stock is trading for 90 times the forecast for next year’s earnings, assuming that Musk delivers on his promise to make a profit, starting with the soon-to-be reported September quarter. If Tesla needs cash—for operations or to redeem bonds due in February 2019—the market still seems ready to pay a premium for Tesla stock certificates. What’s Musk whining about?

Musk has lots of capital ideas, and I tried to learn more about his proposal to ban short selling. But my queries to Tesla went unanswered. In tweets, Musk has argued that short selling stops companies from going public and motivates shorts to attack “by whatever means possible.”

There are many more credible explanations for the decline in the number of initial public offerings. In fact, this has been a pretty good year for new public companies. Short sellers produce some of the most diligent research on Tesla, as they do for many stocks. As negative information gets into the market—through public comment or as stock sales—it blends with bullish information and helps the stock price grope toward Tesla’s real worth. Our economy’s doing fine. Markets where short selling is banned, like those in France, are nothing to envy.

True, some shorts make bogus statements, but so do many longs—none more prominently than Musk himself. His infamous August tweet—“Am considering taking Tesla private at $420. Funding secured”—pushed the stock from $357 to $380. Then last month, the Securities and Exchange Commission charged Musk with stock fraud, alleging that he knew the statement was false when he tweeted it.
Musk, Tesla, and the SEC were in court on Thursday seeking approval for a settlement in which he and his company agreed to pay $20 million each in civil penalties, to be distributed to investors Musk harmed. Without denying the charges, Musk also agreed to step down as chairman for three years.
It will be interesting to see how Tesla implements another part of the settlement. Under a board committee of independent directors, Tesla must oversee and preapprove Musk’s material statements about the company—“in any format,” including investor calls, news releases, the Tesla website, and “social media (e.g., Twitter ).”
This we gotta see. Days after agreeing to the settlement, Musk launched his crusade against Tesla shorts and teased the SEC. “The Shortseller Enrichment Commission is doing incredible work,” he tweeted. “And the name change is so on point!”
Investors panicked that Musk’s tweet would sink the settlement, and the next day, Tesla stock fell $20, to $262. Musk’s mouth had again hurt Tesla stockholders and handed the shorts a one-day gain, this time worth nearly $700 million, on the 34 million share short interest.
The only difference between a long and short position is valence: a plus or a minus sign. So remedies for mischievous shorts are the same as they are for mischievous longs. The SEC showed its willingness to go after short sellers last month, when it filed a civil suit against hedge fund manager Gregory Lemelson, accusing him of making false statements to drive down the stock of drug company Ligand Pharmaceuticals (LGND). Lemelson (who goes by his Christian name Emmanuel Lemelson since becoming a Greek Orthodox priest) declined to comment when I contacted him last week. But in a Sept. 12 press release he condemned the SEC case. “The action is an effort to destroy the reputation of a whistle-blower,” he wrote. “The government’s claims are false and will be proven to be so.”

The SEC will have done Tesla shareholders a favor if Musk’s settlement gets him back to business. He’d do well to follow the example of Amazon.com boss Jeff Bezos, who didn’t waste time railing against skeptics (among them, Barron’s journalists). Bezos instead applied his energies to building a trillion-dollar business.

Write to Bill Alpert at william.alpert@barrons.com
