Elon Musk’s Surprise Pick for Tesla CFO Is a Relative Unknown
The 34-year-old Zach Kirkhorn became a vice president at the auto maker only a few weeks ago
By Tim Higgins
Follow
Jan. 31, 2019 6:51 am ET

Tesla Inc.’s TSLA 2.54%▲ latest C-suite shake-up will thrust a 34-year-old relative unknown into the spotlight as financial chief of one of Silicon Valley’s most heavily scrutinized companies.
The announcement late Wednesday showed Elon Musk’s penchant for surprising investors, when at the end of a quarterly analysts’ call the car-making CEO unexpectedly said he was replacing his longtime confidant, Deepak Ahuja, with “Zach,” without providing his last name.
That would be Zach Kirkhorn, who has worked at Tesla since 2010—save for two years at Harvard Business School—but was named a vice president only a few weeks ago.
Now Mr. Kirkhorn will be tasked with leading Mr. Musk’s charge to turn 15-year-old Tesla into a consistently profitable auto maker—while dealing with the unpredictable behavior of his new boss. Mr. Ahuja, a 56-year-old auto-industry veteran, will be retiring from Tesla for the second time and will stay on as an adviser.
Investors reacted negatively to the move in after-hours trading on Wednesday, sending Tesla’s shares down 5%, much of that occurring in the minutes after the CFO announcement. The stock was off 1% at $305.81 midday Thursday.
The personnel change marked yet more turmoil atop Tesla, turnover that has left its executive bench somewhat depleted, including in the finance department. More than 50 senior executives have left the Palo Alto, Calif., company in the past two years, including its engineering, accounting and human resources chiefs; and last month, another Mr. Musk confidant, general counsel Todd Maron, said he was leaving.
Mr. Kirkhorn’s installment was a surprise to some of Tesla’s closest observers. David Whiston, an analyst with Morningstar Research Services, said he had never heard of Mr. Kirkhorn. “Couldn’t find anything on him,” Mr. Whiston said. “Wonder how long they debated this.”
Ross Gerber, chief executive of Gerber Kawasaki Wealth & Investment and a vocal Tesla investor, was also unfamiliar with the new CFO but likened Mr. Kirkhorn’s hiring with that of Sean McVay, who became the youngest head coach in the NFL in 2017. Mr. McVay, 33 years old, is leading the Los Angeles Rams in Sunday’s Super Bowl.
Attending the University of Pennsylvania during the early 2000s, Mr. Kirkhorn studied mechanical engineering and applied mechanics and was part of the school’s solar-car racing team, according to his LinkedIn bio. He went on to earn an economics degree at the University of Pennsylvania’s Wharton School and spent more than two years at consulting firm McKinsey & Co.
Mr. Kirkhorn joined Tesla in 2010, serving as a senior finance analyst for about 18 months before heading off to Harvard. He returned to Tesla in 2013. His time at Tesla has spanned the introduction of every one of its vehicles, from the original Roadster to the Model 3 compact sedan.
“Zach’s incredibly talented, has made a huge contribution to Tesla over the years, and obviously very well-known to the whole team and has the respect of the whole team,” Mr. Musk said Wednesday.
Tesla declined to make Mr. Kirkhorn available for an interview.
His understated appointment at the end of an hourlong call contrasts with Mr. Ahuja’s arrival at Tesla in 2008 from Ford Motor Co. Tesla issued a press release touting his auto-industry experience that demonstrated the fledgling startup’s aim to combine the best of Detroit and Silicon Valley.
At the time, Mr. Musk was Tesla’s chairman but hadn’t yet taken control as CEO. Tesla would soon be teetering on bankruptcy, and Mr. Musk grabbed the reins to help save the company.
